testing: add content for FiveAM (#404)
LispCookbook/cl-cookbook: testing.md

[Prove](https://github.com/fukamachi/prove) used to be a widely liked testing framework but its repository was later archived. Its successor [Rove](https://github.com/fukamachi/rove) is not stable enough, so we will be using a mature testing framework called [FiveAM](https://github.com/lispci/fiveam). There are also some [other testing frameworks](https://github.com/CodyReichert/awesome-cl#unit-testing) to explore.

FiveAM does not have many documentation resources, yet [this blogpost](http://turtleware.eu/posts/Tutorial-Working-with-FiveAM.html) provides a detailed introduction to it. Here we will introduce it from another perspective.

## Testing with FiveAM

FiveAM has 3 levels of abstraction: check, test and suite. As you may have guessed:
1. A check is a single assertion that asserts a boolean value. 
2. A test is the smallest runnable unit. A test case that may contain multiple checks. Any check failure leads to failure of the whole test.
3. A suite is a collection of tests. When a suite is run, all tests inside would be performed. Suite allows paternity, which means that running a suite will run all the tests defined in it and in its children suites.

> 

Author: Hmmm...Currently the code snippet is put afterwards. What kind of code example you think will be suitable here?

> 

Author: Does it work now?

> 

Reviewer: yes thanks.

### Defining suites

Testing in FiveAM usually starts by defining a suite. A suite helps separating tests to smaller collections that makes them more organized. It is highly recommended to define a single *root* suite for the sake of ASDF integration. We will talk about it later, now let's focus on the testing itself.

The code below defines a suite named `my-system`. We will use it as the root suite for the whole system.

~~~lisp
(def-suite my-system)
~~~

Then let's define another suite for testing `read-file-as-string` function.

~~~lisp
;; Define a suite and set it as the default for the following tests.
(def-suite read-file-as-string :in my-system)
(in-suite read-file-as-string)

;; Alternatively, the following line is a combination of the 2 lines above.
(def-suite* read-file-as-string :in my-system)
~~~

Here a new suite named `read-file-as-string` has been defined. It is declared to be a child suite of `my-system` as specified by the `:in` keyword. The macro `in-suite` sets it as the default suite for test defined later.

### Defining tests

The macro `test` provides a simple way to define a test with given name:

~~~lisp
(test read-file-as-string-non-existing-file

>   ;; IS accepts a boolean expression with optional reason.

Author: What about briefly mentioning check functions including `is`, `signals` etc? Then the comments can be shortened.

>   ;; IS accepts a boolean expression with optional reason.

Author: Fixed.

    (is (null result)
      "Should return NIL when :ERROR-IF-NOT-EXISTS is set to NIL"))
  ;; SIGNALS accepts unquoted name of condition and body to evaluate.
  ;; Here it checks if FILE-NOT-EXISTING-ERROR is signaled.
  (signals file-not-existing-error
    (read-file-as-string "/tmp/non-existing-file.txt"
                         :error-if-not-exists t)))

(test read-file-as-string-empty-file 
  (let ((result (read-file-as-string "/tmp/empty.txt")))
    ;; The reason can be omitted.
    (is (not (null result)))
    ;; The reason can be used to provide formatted text.
    (is (= 0 (length result)))
    "Empty string expected but got \"~a\""))

(test read-file-as-string-normal-file
  (let ((result (read-file-as-string "/tmp/hello.txt")))
    ;; Convention: put expected value as the first arg of =, or equal, string= etc.
    ;; FiveAM generates a more readable report following this convention.
    (is (string= "hello" result))))
~~~

In the above code, 3 test was defined with 5 checks in total. Some checks are actually redundant for the sake of demonstration. You may put all the checks in one big test, or in multiple scenarios. It is up to you.

> The macro `test` is a convenience for `def-test` to define simple tests. You may read its docstring for a more complete introduction, but please note that it is not recommended to use its fixture feature according to [this issue](https://github.com/lispci/fiveam/issues/31).

Author: Wait..If you look at the issue, sionescu who is a contributor said:

>I'm afraid fixtures are not the best designed feature if FiveAM. In practice, I think it's simpler to just use a macro.

> The macro `test` is a convenience for `def-test` to define simple tests. You may read its docstring for a more complete introduction, but please note that it is not recommended to use its fixture feature according to [this issue](https://github.com/lispci/fiveam/issues/31).

Reviewer: What about not linking to the issue (that doesn't make a good impression) and just saying this: that fixtures are not "the best designed" and […] and we'll introduce another library, mockingbird.

> The macro `test` is a convenience for `def-test` to define simple tests. You may read its docstring for a more complete introduction, but please note that it is not recommended to use its fixture feature according to [this issue](https://github.com/lispci/fiveam/issues/31).

Author: Fixed.

         (run 'read-file-as-string-non-existing-file))
~~~

By creating a new sub-class of `text-explainer` and a method `explain` for it, it is possible to define a new test reporting system.

The following code just provides a proof-of-concept implementation. You may need to read the source code of `5am::detailed-text-explainer` to fully understand it.

~~~lisp
(defclass my-explainer (5am::text-explainer)
  ())

(defmethod 5am:explain ((explainer my-explainer) results &optional (stream *standard-output*) recursive-deps)
  (loop for result in results
        do (case (type-of result)
             ('5am::test-passed
              (format stream "~%Test ~a passed" (5am::name (5am::test-case result))))
             ('5am::test-failure
              (format stream "~%Test ~a failed" (5am::name (5am::test-case result)))))))

(explain (make-instace 'my-explainer)
         (run 'read-file-as-string-non-existing-file))
; Test READ-FILE-AS-STRING-NON-EXISTING-FILE failed
; Test READ-FILE-AS-STRING-NON-EXISTING-FILE passed => NIL
~~~

## Mocking with Mockingbird

TODO

## Testing with Prove

> Warning: Prove is obsolete. This section is kept but it is not encouraged to use it.

> 

Reviewer: It's OK to remove it, isn't it?

Author: > Yipee, thanks for tackling this issue. I think you can enable GitHub pages on your fork, so we could read this chapter for real and see how it looks? (like on https://vindarel.github.io/cl-cookbook/)

Oh! Okay..I will try that :-)

Author: I am not sure about this. I think Prove and Rove shares many similar (or even same?) APIs. Maybe it should be somehow transformed to Rove intro?

I have not used Rove for years and do not know its status now.

What do you think?

Reviewer: No strong opinion. But Prove clearly is deprecated, its repository is archived. If you don't feel like updating the section for Rove in the same PR, we can delete the Prove section, and dig it up later© for Rove if needed.

Reviewer 2: Hi all :)

I was looking at the page, and for complete beginners, it is more informative and gives a better outlook if we state that it's superseded by Rove, by the same author.

Something like:

> Warning: Prove is obsolete and superseded by [Rove](https://github.com/fukamachi/rove), by the same author. Both have similar APIs. This section is kept as an overview of Prove until a rewrite is done for Rove.

Author: This is actually the initial intention of mine, i.e. to keep it as a reference for Rove.

But now I am concerned that their APIs are somehow different. If so, this content might be a bit misleading...

@vindarel You make the call.

Reviewer 2: I think it's well written and works for Prove, which isn't that different from Rove.

If you leave it in I might update it for Rove in the next weeks ;)

Reviewer: If another voice says it's better for beginners to keep the Prove, so let's keep it, thanks for the feedback.

But then to properly close the issue we will need to 1) update it to Rove obviously and 2) compare the two frameworks and say what advantages there are to use Rove. The one I saw, using it from the command line, doesn't work as advertised.

coverage. We also give pointers to plug those in modern continuous
integration services like Travis CI and Coveralls.

> [Prove](https://github.com/fukamachi/prove) used to be a widely liked testing framework but its repository was later archived. Its successor [Rove](https://github.com/fukamachi/rove) is not stable enough, so we will be using a mature testing framework called [FiveAM](https://github.com/lispci/fiveam). There are also some [other testing frameworks](https://github.com/CodyReichert/awesome-cl#unit-testing) to explore.

Reviewer: You don't link to 5am docs! (they are not reachable from its Github)

Author: OH! My fault. It only has a API doc that I simply missed it. :-(

Author: Fixed.

(explain (make-instance '5am::detailed-text-explainer)
         (run 'read-file-as-string-non-existing-file))
~~~

By creating a new sub-class of `text-explainer` and a method `explain` for it, it is possible to define a new test reporting system.

The following code just provides a proof-of-concept implementation. You may need to read the source code of `5am::detailed-text-explainer` to fully understand it.

~~~lisp
(defclass my-explainer (5am::text-explainer)
  ())

(defmethod 5am:explain ((explainer my-explainer) results &optional (stream *standard-output*) recursive-deps)
  (loop for result in results
        do (case (type-of result)
             ('5am::test-passed
              (format stream "~%Test ~a passed" (5am::name (5am::test-case result))))
             ('5am::test-failure
              (format stream "~%Test ~a failed" (5am::name (5am::test-case result)))))))

(explain (make-instace 'my-explainer)
         (run 'read-file-as-string-non-existing-file))
; Test READ-FILE-AS-STRING-NON-EXISTING-FILE failed
; Test READ-FILE-AS-STRING-NON-EXISTING-FILE passed => NIL
~~~

## Mocking with Mockingbird

TODO

## Testing with Prove

> > Warning: Prove is obsolete. This section is kept but it is not encouraged to use it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Warning: Prove is obsolete and superseded by Rove, by the same author. Both have similar APIs. This section is kept as an overview of Prove until a rewrite is done for Rove.
```
